[TheiaProk] Initialize theiagen/sieve for N. meningitidis serogrouping and stage for generalized typing (#1111)
theiagen/public_health_bioinformatics: docs/common_text/sieve_task.md

    Sieve reports a tab-delimited summary of the call, and can optionally output serogroup, a comma-delimited list of identified genes, and notes.
<!-- endif -->

<!-- if: nmen -->
??? task "`sieve_nmeningitidis`: **_Neisseria meningitidis_ serogrouping**"

    When GAMBIT identifies a sample as _Neisseria meningitidis_, TheiaProk automatically runs Sieve with the `nmen_serogroup` plugin, which BLASTs a database of _N. meningitidis_ genes against the assembly to predict the capsule serogroup.

    The assembly is screened against a database of _N. meningitidis_ capsule locus alleles, built from AllTheBacteria annotations of publicly available genomes and named according to the standard NEIS capsule locus nomenclature. The default thresholds are permissive (50% identity, 70% coverage) because capsule alleles are diverse and a capsule gene can be split across two contigs. Hits from the same gene broken across a contig boundary are stitched back together before the gene is judged present or absent.

>     The genes found are passed through a decision cascade ported from the PubMLST/BMGAP (PMGA) serogrouping logic. The cascade identifies which serogroup's capsule "backbone" is present, then confirms that every gene essential to that serogroup is present and intact — a gene that is fragmented, interrupted by an insertion element, or carrying a premature stop codon will prevent a positive call. The near-identical W and Y capsule polymerase genes (_csw_ and _csy_) are resolved by translating the gene and reading the single amino acid that distinguishes W from Y.

Reviewer: Two corrections here, checked against the current `nmen_serogroup` implementation in `theiagen/sieve`.

**Insertion elements aren't detected.** `cascade.py` does have a `disrupted` branch that emits `"<gene> disrupted by <element>"`, but `plugin.py` sets `disrupted=None` on every hit, so it never fires - it came across in the port from PMGA without the detector that feeds it. The databases contain no insertion-element loci either: `Insertion_Element` appears only in `allele_exceptions`, never in `gene_names`. The two damage modes actually detected are fragmentation and internal stop codon.

**W/Y resolution has a fallback.** The codon rule is the first of two. A Serine at the discriminating position is the *csy* G310S cross-reacting hybrid, where the codon can't decide; the plugin then falls back to the better-matching allele. If nothing resolves the pair, both loci survive into the cascade and the sample reports as `Contaminated` - worth stating, since that's a surprising result on a clean single-serogroup isolate.

```suggestion
    The genes found are passed through a decision cascade ported from the PubMLST/BMGAP (PMGA) serogrouping logic. The cascade identifies which serogroup's capsule "backbone" is present, then confirms that every gene essential to that serogroup is present and intact — a gene recovered below full length (fragmented) or carrying a premature stop codon will prevent a positive call. The near-identical W and Y capsule polymerase genes (_csw_ and _csy_) are resolved before the cascade runs: the gene is translated and the single amino acid that distinguishes W from Y is read (Proline for W, Glycine for Y), and the losing gene is discarded. When that residue is Serine the codon is uninformative and the better-matching allele is used instead; if neither rule resolves the pair, both genes are kept and the sample is reported as `Contaminated`.
```

    ??? toggle "Interpreting the `sieve_nmeningitidis_serogroup` output"
        | Value | Meaning |
        | --- | --- |

>         | `A`, `B`, `C`, `W`, `X`, `Y`, `Z`, `E`, etc. | A confident serogroup call: the capsule backbone for that serogroup was found and all of its essential genes are present and intact. |

Reviewer: These can be enumerated exactly - the databases define twelve serogroups (`serogroups` in `metadata.json`), so there's no "etc." to cover. (`cnl` is a database entry but never a call value; the `NG` row below has that right.)

```suggestion
        | `A`, `B`, `C`, `E`, `H`, `I`, `K`, `L`, `W`, `X`, `Y`, `Z` | A confident serogroup call: the capsule backbone for that serogroup was found and all of its essential genes are present and intact. These twelve are the serogroups the database defines. |
```

>         | `NG` | Non-groupable. No capsule genes were found, an essential gene is missing, or the sample carries the capsule-null locus (`cnl`). |

Reviewer: Missing a fourth trigger. When capsule genes are present but none is unique to a serogroup, the cascade returns `NG` with the note `"Unclear backbone: Capsule genes present shared across multiple SGs"`. As written, a user who sees `Unclear` in the notes has nothing in the docs to match it to.

```suggestion
        | `NG` | Non-groupable. No capsule genes were found, an essential gene of the backbone is missing entirely, the capsule genes present are shared across several serogroups so no backbone can be assigned (shown in the notes as an `Unclear` backbone), or the sample carries the capsule-null locus (`cnl`). |
```

>         | `Inconclusive` | A capsule backbone was identified, but at least one essential gene is damaged (fragmented, disrupted, or truncated by an internal stop codon), so a serogroup cannot be confirmed. |

Reviewer: Same point as the cascade paragraph above: "disrupted" refers to the insertion-element branch, which never fires. The two states that reach `Inconclusive` are partial coverage and internal stop codon.

```suggestion
        | `Inconclusive` | A capsule backbone was identified, but at least one essential gene is damaged (recovered below full length, or truncated by an internal stop codon), so a serogroup cannot be confirmed. |
```

        | `Contaminated` | Capsule genes unique to more than one serogroup were detected, suggesting a mixed or contaminated sample. |

>         The `sieve_nmeningitidis_notes` output explains the reasoning behind every call (for example, `"W backbone: All essential capsule genes intact and present"` or `"C backbone: ctrA fragmented (61.4% cov)"`), and `sieve_nmeningitidis_genes_present` lists the capsule genes that were recovered. When a call is `NG`, `Inconclusive`, or `Contaminated`, the notes should always be consulted before interpreting the result.

Reviewer: This field isn't the full set of recovered genes. It's populated from the winning backbone's essential gene list, so capsule genes found outside that backbone, and non-essential genes, are annotated internally but never appear in this output. The complete set is the `genes[]` array in sieve's JSON report, which this task doesn't surface. Users comparing `genes_present` against a full capsule-locus expectation will otherwise think genes went missing.

(The wording most likely came from `OUTPUT.md` in the sieve repo, which has the same error - I'll fix it upstream so the two don't drift apart.)

```suggestion
        The `sieve_nmeningitidis_notes` output explains the reasoning behind every call (for example, `"W backbone: All essential capsule genes intact and present"` or `"C backbone: ctrA fragmented (61.4% cov)"`), and `sieve_nmeningitidis_genes_present` lists the essential capsule genes of the called backbone that were recovered. (The complete set of capsule hits, including non-essential genes, is in sieve's JSON report rather than this output.) When a call is `NG`, `Inconclusive`, or `Contaminated`, the notes should always be consulted before interpreting the result.
```

    The default thresholds can be adjusted with the optional `sieve_nmeningitidis_min_identity` and `sieve_nmeningitidis_min_coverage` inputs, and additional BLAST settings can be supplied with `sieve_nmeningitidis_parameters`.
<!-- endif -->

    !!! techdetails "sieve Technical Details"
        |  | Links |
        | --- | --- |
        | Task | [task_sieve.wdl](https://github.com/theiagen/public_health_bioinformatics/blob/main/tasks/gene_typing/task_sieve.wdl) |
        | Software Source Code | [sieve on GitHub](https://github.com/theiagen/sieve) |
        | Software Documentation | [sieve on GitHub](https://github.com/theiagen/sieve) |

>         | Original Publication(s) | [Description and Nomenclature of _Neisseria meningitidis_ Capsule Locus](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1904.111799) |

Reviewer: Worth citing PMGA/BMGAP alongside the capsule-nomenclature paper - the whole decision cascade is a port of its `blast_pubmlst.py`, and the source docstrings reference it line by line. Anyone tracing why a particular call was made will want the upstream implementation.

```suggestion
        | Original Publication(s) | [Description and Nomenclature of _Neisseria meningitidis_ Capsule Locus](https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1904.111799) |
        | Serogrouping Logic | [PMGA (BMGAP) on GitHub](https://github.com/CDCgov/BMGAP) |
```
